There are many financial and business benefits that can be realized by converting from traditional welding techniques and processes to more advanced solutions. Consider these key benefits:

Increased productivity. The financial benefits of any productivity improvements will vary based on the specific situation, but they can be significant. If an operation is currently operating at or near full capacity at current facilities and considering a capital expansion, increasing throughput and productivity at existing facilities could postpone that need. If operations are struggling to find and retain a skilled welding workforce, productivity improvements can help meet demands while utilizing the current workers. If a company operates in or sources fabricated components from regions of the world where labor costs are high, productivity improvements provide a significant cost reduction.
Reduced scrap loss. This is a key issue in some markets because so much money is lost in scrap. If a company is using a stick welding process, it’s relatively easy to calculate the potential savings related to reducing the scrap from stub loss. The nature of stick welding produces stub loss, which is the portion of the electrode that is not able to be deposited in the weld. A common goal for welders is to achieve stub loss lengths of 2 to 3 inches. Depending on the original length of the electrode, typically 11 to 18 centimeters, it is easy to figure the “planned scrap” in the stick welding process — generally 16 to 25 percent of the electrodes. A change from stick welding to a wire process not only eliminates the costs of this stub loss, it also produces labor savings thanks to a more productive process.
Reduction in failures and rework. Consistent arc performance and filler metal selection are key to achieving higher first-time weld pass rates and fewer weld failures. Welding processes and technologies that offer more consistent arc performance can help reduce the time and money spent on weld failures and rework. While there is some risk to changing from one welding process to another, advancements in the technologies and filler metals have helped diminish that risk over the years. Quality is obviously an important factor in the success of a welding operation. A high level of rework not only impacts quality, it also can lead to delays since unplanned rework disrupts the entire flow of the fabrication, manufacturing or construction process.
